What would a world without beauty and creativity be like?
I think most of us would answer, "not worth living in."
Still, how much time do we take to create beauty?
Be it music, drawing, sewing, woodwork
poetry or anything at all.
Some people, like Chris Spheeris make a life of creating.
Aside from selling more than a million CD's
and winning awards for his music,
Chris creates something new everyday.
From photography, gardening and poetry.
To fixing old clocks, Chris says, "we were born to create."
(soft instrumental music)
You are the most creative person I've ever met
personally in my lifetime and the reason is
not only because you've had an incredible
career in music, but also this
extends to everything you do in life.
Photography, renovation of homes.
You're like this incredible artistic
designer for architectural forms.
There's nothing you touch that doesn't turn
into something really beautiful.
And I'm not just saying that to compliment you.
I'm laying the foundation for a conversation
about creativity and why this is not what's
happening in most of our lives.
It's just not happening in most of our lives.
So let's start with when you're a little kid.
I always like to start at the beginning.
What was going on in your life that you
started sensing you had to create.
I think, right away I'm thinking of the imprint.
What that means to me is, I was imprinted to feel boundless.
I wasn't spoiled, not in that sense, not materially.
But I was imprinted to feel like I could create anything.
Play was always encouraged.
Anything that had to do with the
mind or with art, with music.
Any of that as a child was always nourished,
encouraged, and never judged.
That was a big thing, you know judgement
is gonna be a theme I think in this conversation
because creativity and judgement,
they work against each other completely.
Judgement's sort of the antithesis
of the energy of creativity.
So as a kid my sister played classical piano.
My mother was a painter, she also liked to
sculpt a lot of things around the house.
My grandmother used to do everything you
could imagine on the house from,
she would build forts for us and tree houses.
She would fix appliances and then she would
make her own yogurt and cheeses and this and that.
She was born in a Greek village, like a Greek town.
There was so much creativity in the house.
Plus we were always encouraged to have games
around us and music around us.
And my mother gave us records from all different styles.
Lots of classical music was around.
I remember this incredible collection of music.
Traditional American music, they used to have old
slave themes and old Civil War songs.
Things that were just left-field.
So we got all these influences.
I remember there was never a moment where
my parents wouldn't hesitate to
buy me the new Beatle record.
I would wait till the day they would come out.
And they would give me my, in those days it was
probably like, I don't know like a $1.99 or something--
Allowance
Whatever it was, and I'd run
and get the thing right away.
And The Beatles were, I think The Beatles had a
huge influence on me in addition to
my family and their encouragement.
But I think the most important thing generally for me to say
about my childhood is I had a lot of confidence
in the sense that I was never told, "I couldn't create this
"I couldn't do that," it was like, "Try it."
You know, let's just do it, have fun, see what happens.
And the other thing I remember is when I was a kid,
my mother gave me canvases and acrylic paints
and oil paints sometimes and a palette knife and some
brushes and said, "Here, just do whatever you want."
And I created a whole exhibit of abstract art by
the time I was, I think 11.
Wow
But it was all about that, it was a spirit of openness
and support and non-judgement that I think had
everything to do with inspiring me and encouraging
and nurturing me to be a creative person.
And most people don't
have it usually to that degree.
And furthermore, then you put yourself into the systems
that have been created, which we'll talk about later on.
If you haven't had it squeezed out by then with a lot of
self-judgement and judgement from others, it certainly
will be by the time you hit your pubescent years.
And so you did't have that, it was fostered along the way.
And what happened with music?
Because you really became known for music,
although poetry as well, ultimately.
But how did that start evolving for you?
In a serious manner?
And I also wanna know where judgement started coming in?
Where you started having to evaluate,
"Am I good enough to do this for real?" and how that works?
Music, judgement, that's part of my story.
I mentioned The Beatles because I think The Beatles
have to be the most expansive, creative musical group,
at least pop musical group to ever have walked the planet.
And being in the spirit of their creativity.
And I'm talking about vibration now.
I'm talking about how they transmitted this
incredibly high vibration of creativity through
their music on a completely abstract level.
And so, not only was it so boundless, it affected
the entire planet, but my own personal experience is,
they inspired me on a level that I could never even
be in touch with it was so high.
And so it was always like listening to The Beatles
constantly was my mantra.
And I think that, it literally, if you wanna talk in
sort of New-Agey kind of terms, it raised my
vibration constantly as a kid.
And the higher they went, I was with them all along the way.
Through the psychedelic phase and this and that.
And I was very young.
When I saw The Beatles I think I was eight years old
and that was when they first started touring.
So even by the time they finished I was
only about 13 or something like that.
So I was still quite young.
But I was able to really learn about poetry, writing, music.
My ears, my mind was so trained for them.
Fashion, you know lots of things, style.
The way they handled their interviews, the way they talked,
the way that they ran around and jumped
around and played in their movies.
Play, they were all about play
in their films and in their interviews.
Huge influence on me.
So I was shy as a musician when I was quite young.
I mean I had early experience on the piano.
We had a baby grand piano in our living room
and I used to just play abstractly.
I would just hit the low notes and
imagine monsters and this and that.
Go to the high notes and of course
it was the fairies, whatever else.
I would just kind of play impressionistically,
but it wouldn't sound like music, it would just be sound.
So I was just sort of free to play on the piano--
And no one came over and tried to correct you?
Oh no
That's so good.
My sister had to go through the discipline.
She was learning classical piano,
so my ears were being trained that way.
All right so, here is where a major
part of my story comes in too.
Because when I was, let's say about four years old,
I used to sing to my mom and she
taught me this song Baby Face,
"Baby face, you got the cutest little baby,"
okay so I used to sing that to her.
So can you imagine how adorable a little four
or five year old, whatever he was, would sing to his mom.
So one day I was singing that song to her
and my brother walked in the room
and started laughing at me.
And from about five years old till 12, I never sang a note
in public, in front of anybody, I was shamed.
You know my older brother, we were I'd have to say
competitive sibling rivalry, all this kind of stuff.
And basically, innocently he shamed me from singing.
And I didn't even sing in music class
when I was in grade school.
Really?
The teacher would come up to me and say,
"Look you're a nice kid, but you've gotta sing
"cause you're setting a bad example for the other students."
I'm like, "I'm sorry".
Then she said, "Well just mouth it then."
So I used to mouth it silently during music
class till I was about 12 or 13.
Just cause I was ashamed of my voice.
And you've gone through periods of your career
where you really did mostly non-vocals,
instrumentals only for a long periods of time.
Was that still connected back in with that?
Cause you had done a stage where you did come out with
vocals on an album and then it kind of
disappeared again for a very long time.
Well here's part of my healing process,
my spiritual process.
By the time I was 19 I was writing songs.
I had been discovered, this is
how funny my singing career went.
When I was in high school I went to a...
My junior and senior year I went to a
private small high school, really adorable place,
350 kids in the whole high school.
And I was kind of shy so I used to skip lunch.
And I used to bring a bag lunch, I know I skipped lunch.
I didn't want to be out with all these kids surrounding me.
I was feeling really shy.
Skip lunch, where did you go?
I went into the auditorium and I played
the piano and I brought my guitar.
And so I was in the gym and it sounded so good in there
that I would practice the piano and play my guitar.
And this is what I'd do at lunch and I'd have
a little bag lunch so by the time hour was over
I would've played and performed for nobody and eaten.
So one day the singing choir director, music director
of the school, he walked in
during lunch hour and he heard me.
I didn't hear him, he came in the back and the door was open
and he very discreetly and respectfully came up to me
and said, "You know, that sounds pretty good, would you
"consider singing a song at one of our concerts?
"You don't have to join the choir, you don't have to do
"anything, just play whatever you want.
"Any song you want to play."
He was so sweet and his attitude
was so encouraging that I went for it.
And so I started singing in public when I was,
I guess I was 15 years old, yeah 16 years old,
did my first thing in public in front of a high school
parental audience at a high school choir concert.
Were you playing,
were you accompanying yourself too?
I played guitar and I sang Father and Son by Cat Stevens.
And I dedicated it to my dad.
Yeah it was adorable and that was
getting me out a little bit.
And I think there is a healing process in
learning and allowing, I got used to
allowing my voice to come out.
And this of course is a metaphor where...
From four or five years old till now,
it's been a healing process to me to come out and sing
and learn to love my own voice or accept my own voice
or realize it is the voice I have.
Now if you wanna do a parallel between my process and just
allowing myself just to be as a being.
Which to me, when you allow yourself to be,
you allow yourself to be creative.
Because you are basically just
channelling creative energy constantly.
That's what I was
going to ask you next, so exactly.
Here's where it comes.
All right, so in my life I have
purposefully been out on stage singing.
Yes I did it for quite a while
and then I stopped for several years.
But there's a different reason for that.
And then I picked it up again and I've been singing since.
I finally have gotten to realize that my voice is
very human, it it what it is, it's my gift.
It is my vehicle that is unique.
It's the only voice that sounds like that
in the world and maybe in history too.
So I'm just accepting that and that becomes part
of my deep inner process of realizing that it's
not about my own conception of who I think I am.
That to me is the block.
The more I think of who I am and my identity
and my ego identity and myself creating all this
and all that, the smaller it all gets, okay?
Like the external plays so much a part on my own
self-concept that I'm sort of constantly
judging myself if I allow that to happen.
And that's very contractive in nature.
That's what I'm saying, you just allow the outter
to come into where you're, yeah you're very constricted.
On the other hand, along with that,
I'm seeing that I don't really have a clue as to who I am.
And I'm really relieved finally
that I don't have to figure that out.
And not only that, I don't think anyone
has a clue as to who they are.
I think it's charming and adorable that people
think that they know who they are.
(laughter)
I think that's great, but to me, and I'm not judging
anyone's self-concept.
It's just, the ones that work for me are the ones
that allude to the great mystery and say,
"Look, life is a great mystery and the process of living
"and the process of creation is a great mystery."
We don't have access to the secrets,
the deep secrets of life.
I know that you have a website and all this stuff
that all these incredibly intelligent people are on.
And I respect everyone's thoughts
and presence and all that kind of stuff.
So in no way am I saying, am I dissing any of that.
What I am saying though is that,
deep down inside, we're all great mysteries to ourselves.
And once I allow myself to open up to the fact that
I don't have to know who I am, to be.
I don't owe that to the universe, I'm not paying rent here.
I wasn't asked to come here, even though some
philosophies believe that I did ask to come here.
My philosophy is that, I woke up one day
and looked around and said, "Oh I'm here."
And I spent five decades trying to figure out why.
And then I finally realized, you know,
I don't have a clue and I'm a pretty smart guy.
So I'm gonna let that all go and I'm going to
allow the process of me to happen.
So I'm a lot more of an observer now in terms
of this funny and unpredictable process
that happens through my vehicle, okay.
So the reason I'm bringing all this up is
because I am talking about creativity
when I'm mentioning all of this.
Because creativity is not some coveted secret
that only artists have access to.
And a lot of people believe that.
They believe that, "I'm not creative."
When someone looks at me and says they're not creative,
I look at them and I go, "I don't think you
"understand what creativity is."
And so how do you describe to them what it is?
From your perspective?
I say, "Do you cook, do you do the laundry?
"Do you wake up in the morning and get dressed?
I say, "You're being creative all
"the time, you just don't realize that.
"I mean look at you, you don't look like
"anybody else, you don't dress exactly like
"anybody else, you have a style."
And I kind of go more into that.
Realizing that whether you're creating some...
Let's say artistic thing through an artistic
vehicle in a very specific kind of constricted way.
Like it's a symphony or a poem or this or that or painting.
You know why is that considered art and someone
whose had recipes handed down for generations
or puts their own twist on it and makes a table full
of people happy every night, why isn't that creative?
I think that's beautiful, and I think that's very creative.
So part of it is, for me, opening up the definition
of creativity to say that we are all creative
because we are constantly being created.
And it's just the nature of the universe.
What is creativity? It is life happening.
Anything you can conceive of, really.
It's not even what I can conceive of, it's happening
in spite of what I can conceive of.
It is the life force of all the universe just happening.
It's creation all the time.
That's true.
So in that we are in body, in that we have been
privileged to be in existence, okay.
Cause I think being here is a privilege.
We are constantly creative because we are being
creative in spite of ourselves.
Even if someone says, "I'm not creative,"
that's pretty creative, that whole act
is a whole creation itself.
But the point being, is that the more we open up
to what creativity is, the more we just allow it.
Can I keep rambling here?--
Please do, please do--
Cause you're inspiring me to think of all these things--
Please.
Some people say, "You know I used to sketch when
"I was young and I don't draw anymore."
Or, "I used to play music, I used to play the piano,
"but I don't do that anymore."
And my thought immediately with that is,
"Are you judging yourself whether
you think it's good or not?"
Cause I think a lot of creativity and that also applies
to say art classes in public schools and tutorials
and however we learn, there's so much
judgement involved from day one.
Is it gonna to be good?
And there to me is the biggest obstacle
for inspiration and creativity is, is it good?
But what does good mean?
And here we go--
So highly subjective.
It's completely subjective, but what it's indicative of
is a culture that's constantly
judging itself and each other.
We're always judging each other and ourselves.
We're always evaluating and everything in the media
is always saying, "This person's beautiful,
"and that person's not.
"How could Lyle Lovett be with Julia Roberts?"
and silly things like that, where we're all looking
at surface and da-da da-da da, there's all this programming.
Where, in reality everyone's got a unique style
and everyone's got a unique vehicle.
And you give a pen to anybody and say,
"Just draw that flower, just whatever, it's all good."
You know like kids when they're really young
in Kindergarten and stuff, they draw these incredibly
beautiful and naive and pure sketches of things
and they're just beautiful because they're so pure.
Well adults could do that, we can do it.
It doesn't have to look like what we see on TV
or in books or museums, but it's creative.
You don't have to show it
to anybody is the point.
There you go, you don't have to
show it to anybody, you create for yourself.
And that's interesting because now you got me thinking,
"Okay you don't have to show it
"to anybody, but what about ourselves?"
If we allow ourselves to be created,
if I wanna shave my head tomorrow the first thing
I'm going to think of is, "What am I going
"to look like to other people?"
There we go, is it the inner happening,
is it the outer happening?
And of course we're all a combination of that
because we live on this planet.
So for me, I create for myself.
I mean the first thing I do is I'll sit with the piano
or guitar, whatever, the camera.
It's because the act of creation...
Is being in a state, it's the state
of creation that I love, and I'm addicted to it,
it is my drug, it's my religion, it's my drug.
Give me a camera, give me a pen, give me this,
give me that and let me create
and I will be as high as I can be
because I will basically just disappear.
Then you're removed
from time and space, really.
You're in another continuum entirely.
Which then you go to being present, right?
So now we're into Eckhart Tolle
and we're into being right here, right now
and we're into timelessness.
And he's one of the few people, I don't read that much,
but he's one of the few people that have
spoken about being out of time.
And being out of time is a beautiful concept.
I love being out of time.
I talk to other people, my friends about it and things.
They don't quite understand what that means.
Would you describe it as that thing,
well where time stands still?
Where you're involved in, you wake up, you come back
to your third dimensional thinking when you're done
with your creation in that moment and maybe
hours have passed, maybe it's night time,
maybe it's midnight already.
Is it that thing that makes time stand still literally?
The being present thing?
Well yeah, but here's the deal.
People ask me, "Do you meditate?"
And I say, "Well, yes, but maybe
"not in the conventional sense.
"I don't empty out my mind, I empty out my being
"and it fills up with lots of cool stuff
"and either I'm in an active total presence
"or I'm creating, it's the same thing."
I think creating and being present are the same thing.
Being in the moment and being creative are the same thing.
It is the lifting of the limitation of any sort of
ego identity or an obligation to have to be
a certain thing, to allow whatever process,
unlimited, that wants to come through, to be.
So yes, timelessness absolutely.
Because if we're in time, we're marking things.
Yes and that's one of the things
many times when I meet somebody.
If I'm at some gathering and I'm meeting new people,
and want to get to know them, that's usually
the first question I ask them, is, "What is it that
"makes time stand still for you?"
Cause that's the only thing I can think of that
would really get to the heart of who they are.
Has anybody told you good sex?
Yes actually they have, people have said that.
That is one of the primary--
Because that is one of the things probably
more than any other thing, especially males (laughs)
more than women, but yes they have said sex.
And it's interesting because that's tapping into
the essence of a being, to me.
But it's also surprising how many people
have never had the conscious
experience of having time stand still.
Because they're on a wheel of duty,
tasks, fulfilling whatever the driving mission is
of their day or of their life.
And you have never really succumb to that.
In fact, you told me once off camera that you
would die if you had to go through a day without creating.
It would kill your life force.
It wouldn't make any sense to me,
I would have to go inward and create
in my own mind anyway, it just can't happen anymore.
It's like breathing to me, I literally feel smothered
if I can't somehow create in any moment.
I mean, let's put it this way.
This might sound a little condescending,
but when I'm in the presence in an un-engaging conversation
I'm carrying on a completely different creative dialogue
with myself or I'm abstracting what I'm looking at
and create art off someone's face
or their features or whatever it is.
Because i refuse to be held down
into a state that's degrading to my spirit.
Which means I don't want to be
somewhere where I don't feel engaged.
And it happens, sometimes we're obliged
to do certain things.
However, I do have a sub-text going on
that allows me to be entertained in the meantime.
(laughs) Nice being in your head (laughs).
It's your experience of creativity, I understand,
it's totally consistent with everything you've said.
So, have you ever been in a situation in life
say when you were in school for example,
where boundaries were created?
Have there been situations in life
where you have been bounded, bound?
God yes, I mean come on look at this planet.
Right, exactly. So then what happens?
What happens?
I usually get out of those relationships (laughs).
Okay so, relationships number one.
Before that there was school.
You know I don't have children that I know of,
but if I were to do that I would be really careful
about putting them in a public school.
At least a conventional public school.
Because, why would I want my unbounded being
offspring to be programmed to conventional thinking?
And I'm not saying that public school is bad or wrong,
it's a necessary thing and I'm sure there's some
great teachers in public schools systems.
And some great systems within public schools
that are working to inspire children.
It has to be, otherwise we would just have
an entire culture of robots, blind people.
I think that, you know if I were to have children
I would constantly be looking at
what is their nature and how can I nurture their nature?
And here to me is...
I go back to the whole meaning of life thing
that I started with and I think...
If there's a meaning to this life, for me,
and I'll just say specific to me.
Cause I'm the only one who can really
say that for myself.
I would say is to live within my nature.
To live authentically, okay.
To allow what is natural for me, to come through.
So not only does that create a being that
I think is more balanced and more at peace
with himself, which I'm more and more that.
More and more I say because I'm also neurotic
and all the other things that people are.
But I think it also maintains a fairly high level of energy.
So I go back that meditation comment
and I'm thinking okay this, timeless thing
that you were mentioning, this timeless
thing we're talking about, I think
it's training, I think the more that I
engage in timelessness, the more it becomes
more of the critical mass of my life.
The more that i'm engaged in being engaged,
the more I refuse to accept not being engaged.
It makes sense, you're creating a
resonance field charged toward that, that very thing.
And I think that life is very simple in this sense.
I think that all living beings
are in a state of pain avoidance.
If there's anything that I can see that motivates life,
all life doesn't want to be in pain.
I don't know any life, except maybe some
twisted individuals that enjoy that.
Actually maybe not twisted, maybe they just
enjoy that, okay, see, checking.
But most beings that I watch, right down from the very first
one-celled amoeba that I saw as a kid in biology class.
And it was interesting,
this very simple lesson was fantastic.
Teacher said, "Okay, here's an amoeba."
And we're watching this little thing do this thing.
He's like, "Put some little food," and they give you
some little something, some little grain of something.
"And watch the amoeba wrap around this food thing."
So we watch the amoeba wrap around.
Said, "Now we're gonna put something the amoeba
"doesn't like, we're gonna put it right next to it."
And all of a sudden you see it move away.
Now that taught me more about life than
pretty much any simple lesson, ever.
That's all we do.
We wrap around things that make us feel good
and we recede from things that don't.
Okay, it's that simple.
That's what we inherently do.
That's our instinct, but our instincts are often
overridden by various dogma and expectations and so forth.
And that's where you get into institutionalized thinking
or you get into almost like mass brainwashing.
Because one thing for sure, is as we know life right now,
which is why I wanted to talk to you about this so badly.
Every day, as each day passes, I see how the creativity
has been stamped out of the cultures on this planet.
Working more and more toward a worker bee society.
Even recent comments by Obama about the
priorities in the educational system,
"We have to compete with China
"and we have to compete with India.
"We need more science, we need more math."
Oh boy!
When I heard that it was just so depressing to me.
After No Child Left Behind how much worse could it get
than only educating to the next test?
So this is being systematically eroded.
And the parents, you know two parents are working.
They don't have time to really,
like your mother fostered it with you.
Parents aren't taking the time to foster it.
And really, isn't it a value, I mean
this is part, of a value system?
We've got a screwed up value system.
We're not valuing creativity.
No and actually I think it started
in the Reagan Administration.
When they started cutting back on
National Endowment for the Arts,
was the first time I heard of a major cutback of,
National Endowment for the Arts that was in jeopardy.
And then there were programs in schools.
Cause he was the guy who cleaned up all the budgets
everywhere because we were in such havoc economically.
But what he cut back, this is where culturally
in this country, I think was a big step backwards.
I agree.
I'm shocked because I talk to my nephews.
I have two teenage nephews.
And I talk to my ex-girlfriend's children,
who I'm still in touch with.
And they tell me they only have recess twice a week now.
I asked them about what they call Phi-Ed in my days.
I don't know what they call it now,
gym, whatever you wanna call it.
Yeah, they only have that a couple days a week.
And art and music once a week.
Now we had it every day.
We had one hour of art and music every single day.
And that was...
In my book, that would be minimal.
A couple hours of creativity a day
would be minimal for kids.
That's why I would do a whole different thing.
I mean there's hope in public and private school systems--
The Waldorf system
is pretty fabulous that way.
Yeah there's all that, but you're right,
what you're thinking of culturally, I'm going, "Wow."
Yeah it's happening in that direction,
however, you know, art somehow prevails.
It's strange you can have a huge system
that's very oppressive and somehow squeezing out
between the cracks will be intense art.
Well that would be YouTube.
A lot of what you'd see on YouTube for example.
Where everybody can afford a $100 flip camera, you know?
Right and also, look at historically.
Let's say in the 80's when the punk movement came out.
Busting out of a lot of convention.
The last huge burst we saw in creativity
was 60's into the 70's.
The freedom, love, music, was incredible.
Art, dance, poetry, I mean there
was so much going on in that era.
And then it all just kind of all sunk into disco
and fashion and all this other stuff and vanity.
And then little things would burst here and there.
I think right now I'm not personally seeing
a lot of huge leaps in creativity culturally.
I don't know where it is.
I mean our culture looks at the music
world now as like American Idol.
That is the beacon, the icon of what's going
on in the music world right now.
Certainly there is an amount of creativity there,
but the fact that the public votes on it, think about that.
What that means is, the greatest common
denominator determines what good art is.
And I think--
Now that's a pretty big
signal to the mass psyche.
Right, okay, but I think that's
commercialism of creativity is the same thing.
The artists that are respected...
in the conventional world, not so much in the art world,
are the ones who sell the most, right?
That's kind of how it works.
Sort of there's a capitalism of creativity
that's been going on for quite a long time.
Of course it goes back to I'm sure the times that there were
patrons of the arts and the Kings and the Queens.
Because they would pay the artist to do this, this and this.
So these were the pop artists of their times.
So it's been going on, money and art
have been friends for a long time.
But these days, I don't see any radical movements
in creativity in music, in art, that as a public consumer
person in the conventional world, that I'm in touch with.
I'm not a teenager on YouTube looking at
all this fringe stuff, which is awesome.
Very democratic.
Boundless, completely democratic
because no one's voting on it.
Even though they have the votes and all that.
But right now, your points really well taken.
How are we going to save this world?
How are we gonna save this world?
How are we gonna get back in touch
with living an authentic life?
I mean that's really the whole the whole--
The juice of life--
That's really the whole core here
we're talking about right?
Is getting into our core and giving
ourselves permission to be.
That's really what it is.
And not constantly looking at it as if it's okay with them.
It's really right here.
As far as cultural movements, we're all in the fringe now,
it's the fringe people doing that.
Personally, all I can say is this.
In my life I can only change the world by changing
my world, that's where it starts.
I can only change my world by
allowing myself to be who I am.
Naturally I like sharing my creations with people.
Though I'd have to say...
I would say 95% of what I create no one ever sees but me.
No one ever hears but you.
No one ever hears, sees, whatever, feels.
But I do like to share with people because it is,
what I'd said earlier it's what The Beatles
did for me, I see happening with my music.
I just create because I tune into whatever that
inspirational level of energy is.
Something comes through and it creates something.
Which within which is encoded a vibration.
Like I said, I believe inspiration
has a very high vibration.
And your music has a wonderful purity to it.
For me it has a very high frequency.
So that must be what comes through me
to put into some form, to encode so people can
decode it into their own experience.
So all I can do is do what I do, not judge what I do.
I do edit and choose what to share with people.
So I can share that and at times in my life
that has had somewhat of a...
The emanations have been felt worldwide
to whatever extent.
Oh yeah, you've had some good numbers.
You've made a living at it for a lot of years
Yeah, yeah.
And I want to talk to
you about that in a minute too.
Okay, and so what I'm saying is it all starts right here.
Change my world, create within my world, accept myself
and whoever I'm meant to touch,
in whatever ways is me changing the world.
I don't work through political systems, it's not my style.
It's for someone else to do.
But I think as individuals if we learn to accept
ourselves, it's such a powerful message.
I don't know anyone on this planet that
doesn't want to accept themselves.
That's true, that doesn't want
to not feel uncomfortable in their
own skin and in their own lives.
Right, that's huge pain for everybody.
I know it, I've lived it, plenty of it.
Don't get the impression that I've always been
happy and confident and always accepting myself.
No, no, there are phases in early life, in my adult life,
where I go through another notch where
I'm facing my own self judgement and whatever it is.
And because it's so painful to live in that state,
I have to work really hard to get out of it.
So I do because I refuse to stay there.
And then there's a relief and then there's
like a new level of expression.
And then out of that comes the creativity.
There've been times in my life where I've been
through such a deep inner process that it's not
important for me to create outwardly.
And I think a lot of artists go through this and that.
It's just like ebbs and flows and that's
the way the universe works, it breathes.
So we go through our winters sometimes.
And we have our winter, I think that's as important
as part of the creative process, is being totally
in flow and being just crazy prolific.
It's the flow of nature,
the cycles of life, absolutely.
Where you have that gestation going deep inside
into the darkness of the earth and fertile soil
and then boom, you know spring comes, new blossoms.
But you've had to interface with the commercial world too.
And this is just something as a musician,
I'd like to hear from you as your perspective.
A lot of people in the recording industry
are really having a hard time right now.
It's because of what's happened with the
digitization and everything of the files.
Versus the way of first buying vinyl and then tapes
and then CD's and now you go to
basically iTunes for everything.
What has happened and how are we
going to support artists in the future?
Wow, that kinda hits home because
I was raised in an era where music
and selling records and all that, was huge.
I mean the 60's into the 70's were huge with music.
Selling records was a deal up until maybe 10 years ago.
The paradigm's completely changed
and I have to say i'm a little off
balance right now with it all.
Because there are ways of adapting where of course you
put download sites up and you do that sort of thing.
Which is what I'm doing a lot later than most people
because I'm stubborn and I like the
romance of having a piece of something.
When I create something or when it's created
through me I guess is the accurate way for me to say it.
But I do work very hard and I spend a lot of time
and energy in my studio working and I create these things.
Well now these things are invisible.
They're just things that go on the internet
and in 10 seconds you can download one
of my songs that took me an entire month
to create, it's not very romantic.
No it's not very romantic but it's the way.
It's also not very as profitable.
Well here's the deal and here's where
I have to let the world be the world.
And I try not to judge it too much.
Because it could really piss me off right now
and it has in the past.
Realizing that for some reason,
the common belief now is that music is free.
Well, okay, first of all--
The common belief--
It's going through the internet
to access it and anything on the internet should be free.
It's a larger belief system.
Okay, there you go, there's the whole system.
And art's becoming that way and movies have become that way.
I mean so much, whatever you can see
on the internet, somehow you can get for free.
Whether you go through LimeWire or whatever you do.
Or just drag a piece of art off the internet
and print it up, whatever it is.
It's the value of art that has changed so much.
The public, the consuming
public has devalued it.
The general consuming public, yes.
Now looks at what I do as something that is
much cheaper with less value than it used to be.
Like I said, I could take an entire month
of my blood, sweat and tears and squeeze my soul
to create a song and someone can download
it off of LimeWire for free in 15 seconds.
I don't think that's a bad person whose doing that.
I think it's just a different value system that's happening.
We haven't stopped to think
about the net effect of that in the end--
The cause and effect, going back, reciprocity.
Here's a culture that has lost its sense of reciprocity.
For quite a while I would have to say.
But there are great exceptions to that.
We just had an earthquake in Haiti and look at
all the generosity and people's hearts that have poured out.
It's very touching, very beautiful.
Katrina was the same way, on and on and on.
We respond to crises.
We respond to crisis, but as far as artists go
and I'll just speak for myself.
We work really hard, we also have bills to pay.
People are assuming that artists, if they have a certain
amount of notoriety, are already automatically
going to be really wealthy and don't need the money.
Well that's not really true at all.
And I'll speak for any artist on the planet
because no matter how wealthy they are,
they deserve it, they worked really hard.
I don't know any great artist who is,
and I'll just speak for musicians I guess.
Any great pop star who hasn't worked blood,
sweat and tears for years and years and years.
Giving 150% of their everything
they have to earn what they have.
I bless 'em and say, "You deserve it all,
"whatever you get, you deserve it."
In my case, yeah I mean there's times where it's been...
the whole flow of resources have come a lot easier.
And now it's like a whole different picture.
Where's it gonna go?
That's a really good question that I've done enough
research to realize that no one knows right now.
Are we gonna go back to a paradigm that's been
brought up by people like Radiohead where you go,
"I'm gonna give you this art for fee,
"but if you like it, consider a donation."
I mean this was the great example.
And they got an average of something like
over $8 per CD just voluntarily from people.
Which shows that there is hope in certain small enclaves.
There's hope for people appreciating
the value that that art has for them.
As far as who's gonna change the paradigm,
I don't know that anymore.
You can't lock it up anymore.
Anything that can be heard can be digitized, anything that
can be digitized can be given away for nothing.
So maybe it has to start
with each individual embracing their own authenticity
and allowing themselves to create in whatever way.
And as you say, if you can take the judgement off
of what creativity is as we started the conversation,
which I think is beautiful and so appropriate.
If we can do that, and begin seeing
the beauty that flows through.
The pure energy, the balance, the inspiration
that flows through our own individual lives.
Maybe then we'll start appreciating the people
that dedicate their entire lives to the process.
Well that's a great thought, that brings us
full circle from what we started talking about.
Very encouraging yes.
And as I said the best I can do--
It's gonna take some time.
We're pretty dead, we play video,
our kids play video games, they don't create music.
It's gonna take some time, we have to kind of let
this old way, the thing that's occurring right now...
I really think we have to let it basically decay.
And then inspire, like you say, like your mother
did with you, inspire one person at a time.
To begin playing in the sand, playing with mud cakes,
playing with their little xylophones
in their bedroom when they're two
and three years old and awaken it.
Well there's the ebb and the flow.
Right now we're kind of in an ebb in terms of
appreciating the value of creativity and art
I think in a general sense.
But you know what? Historically it comes and it goes.
And they'll be something that may happen
that will waken people up again.
Whether it's individual empowerment
or whether it's an apocalypse.
Whatever it takes, art will prevail
and creativity will because creativity is life.
Nothing more to say about that.
Thank you so much for taking the time to talk with me.
Thanks
To connect with more of Chris's music,
poetry, and other artwork, you can go to chrisspheeris.com.
You'll find his photography, meditations,
music and music videos there, all designed to
inspire each of us to create our own song of life.
After all, creativity is what lights up the soul,
which in turn, lights up our lives.
Until next time, thanks for watching CMN.
Haunting me in my sleep,
Oh what's there on the surface?
Ride the currents that flow,
high above the mystery,
deep in the indigo.
I walked into the desert,
in a season of thirst.
I got the fire within me
I thought my body would burst.
But I found fountains and rivers
wherever I go.
Winding back so smooth and slow.
Into the indigo
(soft piano music)
Dive, dive, dive, I'm going under.
Dive, dive, dive, I'm going in.
I'm going under,
I'm going in.
(soft piano music)
I've climbed the mind's ivory tower,
where the atmosphere's thin.
Sample strange human power,
as I journeyed within, but from up
high I saw beauty
in the water below
And now I dive so deep and slow.
Into the indigo.
Dive, dive, dive, I'm going under.
Dive, dive, dive, I'm going in.
I'm going under,
I'm going in.
When I dive, it's a peaceful surrender.
When I dive, I forget and recall.
When I dive, it's a feeling so tender.
When I dive,
when I dive.
(soft piano music)
Ooh ooh